---
title:   Myths and Facts
isChild: true
anchor:  myths_and_facts
---


## Myths and Facts {#myths_and_facts}

This section is here to dispel the myths or so called standards that have been instilled into chip tuners by poor quality file suppliers.



### Is it normal to see black smoke from a diesel after a remap or DPF delete?

This is not normal, this is the product of a badly written calibration, by normally adding fuel with absolutely no recognition to [[thermodynamic principles]],[[stoichiometry]] or [[Volumetric efficiency]]. A correctly written calibration will provide the cylinder with the correct amount of air to completely combust the given fuel.  Remember that '''fuel is fixed sum''' (energy) and air is variable, '''an engine is driven by the heating of air''' to gain the most power you must heat as much volume of air as possible (exothermic reaction), the fuel already in cylinder must be burnt completely to extract the most energy (allowing for the boundary layer), a complete burn of fixed fuel = more heat, more heat = more power, basic physics.

### DPF Removal - The Facts 

What we are seeing at present are companies offering DPF Removal in order to gain extra power. While there is some truth in this (as increasing airflow in and out of the engine will improve efficiency) The fact of the matter is that they remove the DPF to cover up a number of ignorant tuning issues.

* Fuel duration adjusted, which absolutely ruins the ECU calibration as a whole. Remember, the ECU has been carefully calibrated to deal fuel quantity as a fixed sum with changes in air quantity, density and temperature and a whole host of other inputs to workout its self what fuel relative to air is required. 


### EGR Removal on DPF Vehicles - The Facts

We are currently seeing alot of companies offering EGR deletes on vehicles equipped with LIVE DPF systems. We DO NOT offer this service for a number reasons. First of all, as part of the integral emissions system that was embedded into the software, the EGR and DPF systems work together in the regeneration process.

If the EGR system is deleted by means of duty cycle and airflow modification, this will have a negative impact on the DPF regeneration cycle. The DPF system was designed to work along side the EGR using different strategies in the passive and active regeneration process.

Once the EGR is modified, by default, this will upset the regeneration strategies and more often than not, result in an early DPF filter failure due to incorrect regeneration strategies.


### Statistical elements

This is the core structure of the ECU function - It can be made up by a number of control algorithms such as 'Motronic' and elemental rules such as ideal gas law, this also includes configuration switches and curve/map address library for the controller to switch between based on the strategy or mode required.

###Curve

The curve structures in the ECU are a vital and are often mistaken as torque limiters by 'CUSTOM MAPPERS' or re-scaled in a effort to bypass a mechanical limit resulting in a loss of resolution and refinement. An ECU can only interpret what a engine is doing by its input signals via the relevant sensors. This is usually done by voltage or frequency - so the 'curve' is the real world signal conversion to a digital value the ECU can use in a calculation to out put to its PWM's

### Map

Basically a data matrix, a table of data values arbitrated to a output of the ecu drivers or PWM's referencing values such as requested torque, boost, lambda and air flow. These are desired targets based on the data and control logic influenced by the 'curve' and 'statistical elements'. ALL employing PID control - understanding this will expose the ignorance of most chip tuners.


### Is it normal to re-flash a vehicle a number of times?


When files require a redo, this could be due to a number of reason.

* Unqualified person writing file with little or no knowledge of basic engine principles, usually never lifted a spanner swallows a few forum threads thinking this somehow bypasses the need for experience and qualifications.

* Undeveloped files, ie wrote on the fly using guess work, or try's to import settings from another file from a similar vehicle

* File given out as a hardware/software match alone with no checking of software updates or calibration changes - SOFTWARE NUMBERS CAN BE THE SAME YET THE FILE CAN HAVE MANY VERSIONS -

* Human error, typos, adjusting incorrect areas etc etc

### The General misconceptions of "Staged tuning" i.e. stage 1,2,3,4,5

Usually started from vehicle owner forums run/owned/funded by tuning companies yes that's right.., pushing 'you wanna go there mate..'the fact that every time an extra piece of hardware is installed on the engine, then a calibration adjustment is required. To a certain degree this is true when you get to high levels of hardware. In the eyes of the general public, this poses a grey area between the stage 1 and 2 tune calibration. On a modern torque based petrol ECU, the fitting of the following requires no further modification. 

* full exhaust system with decat
* cold air intake system or air filter replacement
* Inter-cooler upgrade
* Basically anything that '''improves airflow''' into and from the engine.

The truth of the matter is, a correctly calibrated ECU will be able to deal with the '''extra air''' or air at a higher relative density (cooler) thus adjusting fuel and advance trims accordingly (adaption). This is where people assume, that having all of this hardware fitted they require further adjustments. This engine now is what would be called stage 2.
It has been noted that some companies offer stage 1 and 2 tunes to completely stock vehicles, and why a "CUSTOM REMAP" phase by now must seem like the ignorant 'BS' it is.

A true staged tuned would be required when further hardware has been installed, as follows

* upgraded/hybrid turbo
* Upgraded injectors
* Larger MAF or modification to run on MAP alone (Alpha N)
* basically anything that requires re-calibrating or re-scaling from standard production.



### Clone / Copied Tools

The fact is, with most things in life, there will always be copies, clones, rip offs. For example DVD movies and CD Albums. When it comes to chip tuning, Yes many tools have been copied/cloned etc.  A quick google search will reveal the extent of how many clone tools are a wash over the internet. As an example, try and search ''FGtech'' for the legitimate FGtechnology website, lets put it this way, its not in the top 10 results. The fact that china has gone all out on manufacture and marketing of these tools, and even to the point of starting websites with very similar names means that people very little experience in chip tuning may be duped into thinking they are buying a legitimate tool a fraction of the cost of the genuine article.

### DO clones Works?

This question is very difficult to answer, as ''clones are clones'' and it will be up to the user to test. The quality of the components and construction varies. The tools cannot be used while connected to the internet, so they cannot be updated to the very latest software/firmware, some protocols may or may not work due to old or corrupt software/hardware. The best source of information on these tools is the internet, like a chip tuning forum etc, although most major chip tuning sites actually ban the talk of clone tools, as you can imagine this is quite a taboo subject.

For someone looking to start up a professional chip tuning business, then there in no compromise for a genuine tool. Genuine tools are built as the manufacturer intended, All of the protocols listed 99% of the time work, so there is no real chance of error. 

The economy of the clone tool market for a professional tuner is a false one. If you take into account possible lost time/earnings and replacement of damaged ecu's, it doesn't take many bad jobs to be at the same expenditure that a genuine tool would cost in the first place. Where possible, always use a genuine tool.
