---
anchor: theory
---

# Theory {#theory_title}


## Basic Engineering Principles

### Open loop Vs Closed Loop Management systems

Electronic Engine Management Systems utilize two forms of management when it comes to precisely controlling an engines operation. These are known as Open Loop and Closed Loop control systems.

In an Open Loop system the ECU ignores the data received from many of these sensors and will simply run the engine according to a base “map” that was programmed into the ECU by the manufacturer. This ECU map is the only reference point the ECU uses when it comes to determining Injector Pulse-Widths and timing and spark timing, rather than receiving and processing inputs from all the engines’ sensors.

The advantage of operating an Open Loop system is that the engine can run on far fewer sensors and inputs to the ECU and still operate to a satisfactory level. These systems are also cheap and easy to program because the ECU doesn’t need the processing power that an ECU operating a Closed Loop system does when it has to process various sensor inputs.

Theoretically and engine running with an Open Loop engine management system can run on only a Crankshaft Position Sensor and Throttle Position Sensor, something that a solely Closed Loop system would be incapable of doing. Where Closed Loop Systems come into their own is when performance and economy are the major concern; because the ECU is receiving and processing so much useful data about exactly how every aspect of the engine is running, it can make very minute and precise adjustments to maximise performance and economy at all times.

One example of why these systems are so useful is the Knock Sensor.

Knock Sensors are installed in the engine block close to the top of the combustion chamber, the perfect position to detect a phenomenon we call engine knock or detonation. Detonation occurs when the engine is running too much spark advance or the combustion chamber is so hot that it ignites the Air Fuel Mixture before the piston reaches the top of the cylinder. When detonation occurs the flame front attempts to push the piston back down the cylinder when it is still on the upwards stroke which then causes it to make a knocking noise.
Knock sensors produce a voltage when detonation occurs and tells the ECU. The ECU then proceeds to back the spark advance off a bit until it stops, at which point the ECU then begins to increase spark advance until detonation occurs again. The reason why ECU’s do this is because engines run most economically when they run as lean as possible and with as much spark advance as possible, so knock sensors allow us to run the engine as close to the point of detonation as possible without actually detonating.

When we utilise an Open Loop system the ECU won’t safely be able to run the engine with as much spark advance. To ensure safe engine operation and reliability the ECU will be programmed to run the engine within a safe spark advance limit at all times, rather than running just on the edge of detonation – this system is safe but will not allow the engine to run in its most economical state.

As a brief summary, Open Loop systems are cheap to install but uneconomical whereas Closed Loop systems are more complex and expensive however they offer far superior economy.


As was previously explained, a Closed Loop system utilises various sensor inputs from throughout the engine to allow the ECU to make fine adjustments to ignition and fuelling systems during engine operation. One of the most important sensors used in Closed Loop systems is the Lambda/O2 Sensor. This sensor sits in the exhaust system, usually in the collector of the downpipe, where it can monitor the composition of the exhaust gases. The sensor looks for excessive content in the exhaust gases, when the O2 levels are too high the sensor reports this back to the ECU and the ECU then knows that the engine is running too lean. When levels drop too low then the ECU knows that the engine is running too rich and fuel is being wasted, so it then adjusts injector pulse widths accordingly.

When O2 sensors fail we often find that the engine runs far too rich or too lean, resulting in excessive fuel consumption or in the worst case scenario a full engine lean out, which then melts piston tops. To avoid a full lean out however we have an Open Loop failsafe in place; if a sensor or a set of sensors fail, the ECU reverts to a safe mode which is essentially an Open Loop management system that utilises predetermined safe fuel maps to ensure the driver can get the car to a garage safely without causing any lasting damage.

When this fuel and ignition map is implemented we can expect to see a significant rise in fuel consumption, a loss of power and on engine with Variable Valve Timing we also find a drastically lowered rev limit.


Interaction Between Engine Management Systems
The interaction between all engine management systems in Closed Loop ECU’s is critical if we are to obtain maximum performance and economy. If we could look at an ECU’s programming easily, we would see that the ECU relies on more than just one system for best fuelling and ignition control. For example, the ECU will not be programmed so that when the TPS sensor reads 25 Degrees of Throttle Angle the injector pulse is 0.8m/s no matter what other sensors read. Instead you will find that it is reliant upon other factors such as the oxygen density flowing into the engine and the manifold pressure. If the Throttle was open by 25 degrees with 12% oxygen content to offer a 0.8m/s pulse width, you would find that the pulse width then increases when the oxygen content rises to ensure maximum power and a clean burn of fuel without leaning out from the extra oxygen content.

Another example of systems that are reliant upon each other is indeed one that I mentioned earlier – the knock sensor and the ECU’s control over the ignition timing depending upon the knock sensors’ readings. The ECU knows that it must keep the engine as close to detonation as it can without actually causing detonation, so the ECU continuously increases spark advance until the engine knocks at which point it then backs it off before it starts pushing closer towards detonation again. In conjunction with the knock sensor the ECU will also continue to monitor Coolant Temperature – remember that higher combustion chamber temperatures increase the likelihood of detonation, thus spark advance will need to be backed off to compensate for that as a more economical solution to simply dumping extra fuel in the combustion chamber.

More modern engine management systems are now ‘learning’ the drivers style of driving – for the first time the driver takes a new car out of the show room the ECU will monitor and store information regarding the RPM’s the driver likes the change gear, the RPM range the driver uses most, the throttle openings the driver uses most and generally how the driver uses the engine. The ECU then optimises itself from the data gathered to ensure maximum performance and economy to match the driver. For example, when the ECU recognises the driver using the bottom of the rev range more often with small throttle openings, suggesting low speed town driving it will adjust the Throttle Actuator.

Most modern cars use a fly-by-wire system whereby the throttle pedal isn’t directly connected to the throttle lever; instead an actuator opens and closes the throttle body butterfly valve according to the voltage produced by the potentiometer on the throttle pedal. Adaptive ECU’s that note low RPM averages will then ensure that the butterfly opens by very small amounts during town driving to make it easier for the driver to manoeuvre and drive at low speeds. This benefits cars with very large throttle bodies where it is quite difficult to move by the pedal by such small amounts so as to prevent the throttle from snatching and over revving. This is why some cars have a sport mode.

Sport mode generally ignores all data gathered about the drivers’ style and maximises engine performance at the expense of economy – the throttle response will be drastically sharpened making the car tougher to drive at low speed as the throttle is sharper and more likely to snatch away from the driver at low speeds. The suspension is also firmed up in cars with active suspension, gear changes are sped up with automatic vehicles and cars with EPAS also find that the steering is sharpened up to offer more response to the driver.


## Advanced ECU Engineering Principles

The cornerstone of ECU calibration is PID control, understanding this is a must in order to comprehend whats happening within any ECU.

A proportional-integral-derivative controller (PID controller) is a control loop feedback mechanism (controller) widely used in automotive and industrial control systems. A PID controller calculates an error value as the difference between a measured process variable and a desired setpoint. The controller attempts to minimize the error by adjusting the process through use of a manipulated variable.

The PID controller algorithm involves three separate constant parameters, and is accordingly sometimes called three-term control: the proportional, the integral and derivative values, denoted P, I, and D. Simply put, these values can be interpreted in terms of time: P depends on the present error, I on the accumulation of past errors, and D is a prediction of future errors, based on current rate of change. The weighted sum of these three actions is used to adjust the process via a control element such as the position of a control valve, a damper, or the power supplied to a heating element.

In the absence of knowledge of the underlying process, a PID controller has historically been considered to be the best controller. By tuning the three parameters in the PID controller algorithm, the controller can provide control action designed for specific process requirements. The response of the controller can be described in terms of the responsiveness of the controller to an error, the degree to which the controller overshoots the setpoint, and the degree of system oscillation. Note that the use of the PID algorithm for control does not guarantee optimal control of the system or system stability.

Some applications may require using only one or two actions to provide the appropriate system control. This is achieved by setting the other parameters to zero. A PID controller will be called a PI, PD, P or I controller in the absence of the respective control actions. PI controllers are fairly common, since derivative action is sensitive to measurement noise, whereas the absence of an integral term may prevent the system from reaching its target value due to the control action.
